CONFIDENTIAL

A proposal for the development of software services and practices to improve 
the accessibility of online video and multimedia, for learning

N.D.Freear, The Open University, 10 January-11 February 2009.

Summary

Video and other multimedia are often key components of primary course materials, 
and can also be used informally as supplementary material on Open University 
courses. Furthermore, the Open University and other educators have a 
quasi-marketing presence on various Web 2.0 sites, with for example introductory 
and "about learning with the OU" videos on YouTube 
[http://youtube.com/user/TheOpenUniversity] and iTunesU [http://podcast.open.ac.uk]. 
Certainly in the former case and probably in the latter (primary and 
supplementary/marketing material) the University has a legal obligation to 
provide alternative formats, like captions for the hard of hearing and 
audio description for visually impaired people. The Open University has some 
success in these areas (95% of OU iTunesU podcasts have transcripts, 
http://projects.kmi.open.ac.uk/itunesu/impact/ ), but coverage elsewhere is 
patchy. Services like YouTube allow the author to upload captions with their video, 
however the results are not fully accessible, and very few authors across the 
world use this feature. There are also significant barriers to the use of 
media players like the YouTube player in terms of control, particularly for 
speech recognition and screen reader users.

This project, provisionally termed Media Accessibility (MA), aims to provide a 
web site for the social and community co-creation, editing, storage and delivery 
of alternative formats, and software services and components to improve 
media players, where possible in-situ. In-situ may for example mean producing 
a Web browser plug-in that operates on the YouTube web site to deliver a player 
with improved controls and the display of alternative formats. It is proposed 
that the alternative formats (captions, audio description etc.) are created by 
a combination of automation and crowd-sourcing. Community participation would 
be encouraged by providing usable editing tools, strategic partnerships, 
individual recognition, feedback, and "social-karma" features. The proposed 
scope would initially be materials directly relevant to the Open University, 
partner organisations, and their students and staff. It would widen to 
educational multi-media generally, and eventually beyond education. Free and 
open access to alternative content and software tools is proposed as a 
key element of the project.

(Words: 322.)


Keywords

accessibility, usability, caption, subtitle, audio description, described video, 
annotate, transcribe, multimedia, data portability, integration, open content, 
social production, co-creation, wiki, web service, free software.


--
RNIB Techshare 2009 - 18 May 2009

Title:  Multimedia accessibility - are we nearly there yet?

Main presenter:  Dr Nicholas Freear.

Abstract:

The generally low incidence of captioning for the deaf and audio description for 
those with sight impairments on the Web is in stark contrast to the progress 
made in basic Web accessibility. The captioning function offered by YouTube is 
a step in the right direction, though it is beset with problems. 
Audio description is in a worse state. 

As video and multimedia are often key components of distance courses, and can 
be valuable for informal learning this is a real concern for all educators, 
including the Open University. Furthermore, the University has a quasi-marketing 
presence on Web 2.0 sites, with introductory videos on YouTube and iTunes U.

The project aims to provide a web site for the social and community co-creation, 
editing, storage and delivery of alternative content, and software services and 
components to deliver this content, fix media players and improve the user 
experience. The presentation will detail the challenges and progress so far, 
and invite participation and discussion. Free and open content and software tools, 
and content portability are proposed as key elements of the project.

(Words: 180.)


--
KN workspace: Media accessibility project
  http://kn.open.ac.uk/workspace.cfm?wpid=9078

Media accessibility project - long proposal
  http://docs.google.com/Doc?docid=dc53chjk_5p9sqw8f2&hl=en_GB


[End.]